
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
tarts will be all that much the better for it! Pepper indeed!"
continued the King. "Why don't you use blotting paper while you're
at it?" he added sarcastically.
"I do," replied the Queen, "but not much."
"Very funny!" said the King. "Anyway, now you have your
pepper back, so will you please make me the tarts?"
"Without sugar?" said the Queen.
"What's the matter, isn't the jam sweet enough?" asked the King
impatiently.
"I need sugar for the dough, and my sugar has been stolen!"
"Oh, not again!" said the King wearily. "These tarts will never get
made!"
Well, recovering the sugar turned out to be a relatively simple
affair. The sugar was found in the house of the Duchess, and as
events proved, it was stolen by either the Duchess or the Cook, but
not both. They made the following statements at the trial:
DUCHESS: The cook did not steal the sugar.
COOK: The Duchess stole the sugar.
The one who stole the sugar was lying. (It is not given whether
the other one lied or told the truth.)
Which one stole the sugar? Also, was the other one lying or telling
the truth?
THE FIFTH TALE "Well," said the King, "here is your sugar,
so you can make me the tarts."
"Without salt?" asked the Queen.
So! The salt had also been stolen! Well, this time it was found that
the culprit was either the Caterpillar, Bill the Lizard, or the
Cheshire Cat. (One of them had come into the kitchen and eaten up
all the salt; the container wasn't missing.) The three were tried and
made the following statements in court:
CATERPILLAR: Bill the Lizard ate the salt.
BILL THE LIZARD: That is true! CHESHIRE
CAT: I never ate the salt!
12
Who Stole the Tarts?
As it happened, at least one of them lied and at least one told the
truth.
Who stole the salt?
THE SIXTH TALE "Here is some more salt, so now you can
make the tarts," said the King.
"Can't," said the Queen. "Somebody stole my baking pan."
"Baking pan!" shouted the King. "Well, of course we'll have to get
that back!"
This time the search was narrowed down to the Frog-Footman,
the Fish-Footman, and the Knave of Hearts. They made the
following statements at the trial:
13
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
FROG-FOOTMAN: It was stolen by the Fish-Footman.
FISH-FOOTMAN: Your Majesty, I never stole it! KNAVE
OF HEARTS: I stole it!
"A fine help you are!" shouted the King to the Knave. "You
usually lie through your teeth!"
Well, as it happened, at most one of them lied.
Who stole the baking pan?
THE SEVENTH TALE "Here is the baking pan," said the King,
"so now you can make me the tarts."
"Without a recipe?" inquired the Queen.
"Use your usual recipe," cried the King impatiently, "last time
your tarts were delicious!"
"Can't," said the Queen. "The recipe is in my cookbook, and the
cookbook has just been stolen!"
Well, the most likely suspect was the Duchess's Cook, and the
14
Who Stole the Tarts?
cookbook was indeed found in the Duchess's kitchen. The only
possible suspects were the Cook, the Duchess, and the Cheshire Cat.
"The Cheshire Cat stole it!" said the Duchess at the trial.
"Oh, yes, I stole it!" said the Cheshire Cat with a grin.
"I didn't steal it!" said the Cook.
As it turned out, the thief had lied and at least one of the others
had told the truth.
Who stole the cookbook?
THE SEVENTH TALE (CONTINUED) Shortly after the cook-
book was returned to the Queen, it was stolen a second time—again
by either the Duchess, the Cook, or the Cheshire Cat.
At the trial they made exactly the same statements as at the last
trial. Only this time, the thief lied and the other two either both lied
or both told the truth.
Who stole the cookbook this time?
THE EIGHTH TALE "Well, here is your cookbook back again,"
said the King, "so you now have the recipe. So make me the tarts!"
"Without milk, butter, or eggs?"
"Oh, me!" cried the King. "This is too much!"
"And this time I know it was the March Hare, the Mad Hatter, and
the Dormouse," shouted the Queen, stamping her feet in rage. "I
actually saw them sneaking out of the window when I came into the
kitchen. Each was carrying something, but I couldn't tell who was
carrying what."
"We'll soon settle that!" roared the King.
Well, the ingredients were all found at the house of the March
Hare, Mad Hatter, and Dormouse. The three were tried and made
the following statements at the trial:
MARCH HARE: The Hatter stole the butter.
HATTER: The Dormouse stole the eggs.
DORMOUSE: I stole the milk.
15
As it happens,the one who stole the butter told the truth and the one
who stole the eggs lied.Who stole what?
THE FINAL TALE "Well, here is your butter, eggs, and milk all
back," said the King, "and I see you have your jam, flour, sugar,
salt, baking pan, and cookbook—even your pepper. Now you can
surely make me the tarts!"
Well, the Queen made a marvelous batch of tarts. "These are
even better than last time," said the Queen to herself. "I'm sure the
King will be delighted!"
The Queen went up to the Royal Chamber to announce to the
King that the tarts were ready. Arm in arm they went down
together to the kitchen, but when they got there, they found the
table empty—the whole platter of tarts was clean gone!
"Now this has gone too far!" cried the King, paling with rage.
"Who sneaks into my house like this? I've half a mind to really
execute the culprit!"
Well, needless to say, the culprit did not really get executed, but
he was caught, and the tarts were fully recovered. That ends my
story.
"What do you mean, that ends your story?" asked (the real) Alice
excitedly. "You haven't told us who stole the tarts, nor whether
there was a trial, and if there was, what happened at the trial—you
haven't told us anything!"
"Well, there was a trial," I added, "but it was a very complicated
one, and for you to figure out who was guilty involves solving a
complicated logic puzzle, so I think I'll wait a few years until you're
all grown up, and then I'll tell you what happened."
"No, we want to know what happened!" said Tony.
"I'll let you know what happened," I replied, "but in a few more
years when you're all grown up."
"No, no, we want to know now!" they all shouted.
16
Who Stole the Tarts?
"All right," I replied, "but you won't blame me if I give you a very
complicated logic puzzle?"
"We won't blame you—really we won't. Only stop keeping us in
suspense—tell us what happened!"
So I continued—
Well, as I said, the trial was quite a complicated one. The first
suspect was the Knave of Hearts, but circumstantial evidence was
brought forth which established beyond any reasonable doubt that
the Knave of Hearts couldn't have stolen the tarts. The next suspect
was the Dormouse. However, several reliable witnesses testified that
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
the Dormouse was fast asleep at the time of the robbery, hence it
couldn't have been the Dormouse. At this point the trial came to a
dead standstill.
Suddenly the door of the courtroom burst open, and the White
Rabbit proudly entered, bearing the tray of tarts. Behind him came
the soldiers, dragging in the Gryphon and the Mock Turtle in
chains.
"The tarts were found on the beach," explained the White Rabbit.
"The Gryphon and the Mock Turtle were just about to eat them
when the soldiers happened to come by and put them in custody."
"That proves their guilt without any question of doubt," shouted
the Queen, "so off with their heads immediately!"
"Now, now," said the King, "we must give them a fair trial, you
know!"
Well, events happened which proved that the Gryphon and the
Mock Turtle were not both guilty—the questions that remained were
1
Who Stole the Tarts?
whether either one was guilty, and if so which one; or whether
someone else was guilty: Was it a mere coincidence that the tarts
were found by the Gryphon and the Mock Turtle? No; evidence
was soon produced that conclusively proved that either the
Gryphon or the Mock Turtle was guilty (but not both), but the court
could see no way to decide which one it was. It seemed that no
further progress could be made, but quite suddenly a whole medley
of witnesses came up, making various statements.
"The Gryphon never stole the tarts," said the Duchess.
"But he has stolen other things in the past," said the Cook.
"The Mock Turtle has stolen things in the past," said the
Cheshire Cat.
"The Cheshire Cat has stolen things in the past," said the
Caterpillar.
"The Cook and the Cheshire Cat are both right," said the March
Hare.
"The Cook and the Caterpillar are both right," said the Dor-
mouse.
"Either the Cheshire Cat or the Caterpillar is right—and maybe
both," said the Hatter.
"Either the March Hare or the Dormouse is right—and maybe
both," said Bill the Lizard.
"The Cook and the Hatter are both right," said the Knave of
Hearts.
"Bill the Lizard is right and the Knave of Hearts is wrong," said
the White Rabbit.
There was a dead silence.
"All this proves nothing!" roared the King. "Just words, words,
words—all useless words!"
"Not so useless, your Majesty," said Alice, rising from the jury. "It
so happens that the White Rabbit and the Duchess made statements
which are either both true or both false."
All eyes turned eagerly to Alice. Now, everyone knew that Alice
makes only true statements, and subsequent investigation showed
that this statement was no exception. Moreover, this statement
solved the entire mystery.
Who stole the tarts?