Alice's next adventure was far more pleasant. "I hate these
examinations," said Alice to herself, shortly after she had left the
company of the Queens. "They remind me so much of school!"
Just then Alice practically stumbled on Tweedledum and
Tweedledee, who were grinning under a tree right by their house.
Alice looked carefully at their collars to see which was marked
"Dum" and which was marked "Dee," but neither collar was
embroidered.
"I'm afraid I can't very well tell you apart without your embroi-
dered collars," remarked Alice.
"You'll have to use logic," said one of the brothers, giving the
other an affectionate hug. "We were expecting you to come around
these parts, and we have prepared some nice logic games for you.
Would you like to play?"
"What are the games?" asked Alice.
"Well, there are two games. The first is called Which of Us Is
Tweedledee and Which Is Tweedledum? The second is called
Which of Us Is Tweedledum and Which Is Tweedledee? Which
game would you like to play first?"
"They sound so horribly alike," replied Alice. "It's dreadfully
confusing!"
"Ah, they may sound alike," he replied, "but that doesn't mean
they are alike, nohow!"
"Contrariwise," replied the other, "if they were alike, they
74
Tweedledum or Tweedledee?
wouldn't be, but if they weren't alike, they might be. Therefore,
they're not alike. That's logic!"
It took Alice a bit of time to puzzle this out.
"If the names confuse you," said the first brother, "both games
have alternative names. The first is also called Red and Black; and
the second, Orange and Purple."
"What are the rules of the games?" asked Alice.
"Well, each game has six rounds," he replied. "Let us play the first
game first—the game Red and Black."
At this point he pulled out a playing card from his pocket—it was
the Queen of Diamonds—and showed it to Alice.
"As you see, this is a red card. Now, a red card signifies that the
one carrying it is telling the truth, whereas a black card signifies that
the speaker is telling a lie. Now, my brother there [he pointed to the
other one] is also carrying either a red card or a black card in his
pocket. He is about to make a statement. If his card is red, he will
make a true statement, but if his card is black, he will make a false
statement. Then your job is to figure out whether he is Tweedledee
or Tweedledum."
"Oh, that sounds like fun!" said Alice. "I'd like to play!"
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
"After you have figured out who he is, your second job is to figure
out who I am, you know!"
"Well, that part is just silly!" replied Alice, with a scream of
laughter. "Obviously if he is Tweedledee, then you must be
Tweedledum, and if he is Tweedledum, you must be Tweedledee.
Even a dunce could figure that out!"
"Quite right," he replied, "and now let's play!"
ROUND ONE At this point, the other brother said, "1 am
Tweedledum, and I am carrying a black card."
Alice had little difficulty in figuring out who he was. Who was he?
"Congratulations!" said both brothers at once, each shaking one
of Alice's hands. "You have won the first round!"
"Now, for the next four rounds," said the first brother, "before
each round, we both disappear into the house, where we have a
pack of cards. We go into a huddle, then one of us puts a card in his
pocket, comes out, and makes a statement. You must then figure
out which one he is."
"Will he be carrying the same color card as in the last round?
asked Alice.Tweedledum or Tweedledee?
"Not necessarily" was the reply. "Each time we go into the house,
the game begins afresh, and we are at liberty to change our cards or
not."
"I understand," said Alice.
ROUND TWO The brothers then went into the house, and,
shortly after, one emerged with a card in his pocket and said, "If I
am Tweedledum, then I am not carrying a red card."
Alice found this considerably more difficult than the first puzzle,
but she finally managed to solve it. What is the solution?
RO UND T H RE E In this round, a brother came out a nd
said, "Either I am Tweedledum, or I am carrying a black card."
Who was he?
ROUND FOUR In this round, a brother came out and said,
"Either I am Tweedledum carrying a black card, or I am
Tweedledee carrying a red card." Who was he?
ROUND FIVE This time, the brother who emerged said,
"Tweedledum is now carrying a black card."
Who was he?
"Very good!" he said to Alice. "You solved that one very nicely!
Now, the last round of this game is more complicated: I go into the
house, and my brother and I go into a huddle, and then both of us
emerge, each with a red or a black card in his pocket. Our cards
"might be of the same color, or of different colors. Then we both
77
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
make statements. You will have to take both statements into account
to figure out who we are."
"That sounds more difficult!" said Alice.
"About twice as difficult," replied Tweedledee.
ROUND SIX Well, Tweedledee went into the house, and both
brothers came out shortly after.
They look more alike than ever! thought Alice.
Well, one of them—call him the first one—stood to Alice's left,
and the other—call him the second one—stood to Alice's right.
They then made the following statements:
FIRST ONE: My brother is Tweedledee, and he is carrying a black
card.
SECOND ONE: My brother is Tweedledum, and he is carrying a
red card.
Which one is which?
"Congratulations!" cried both brothers. "You have won every
round!"
78
Game II: Orange and Purple
Tweedledum or Tweedledee?
"Now, the next game," said Tweedledum, "is much more interest-
ing! It also has six rounds. Before each round, we go into the house
where we have another pack of playing cards. These cards are
colored orange and purple, rather than the usual red and black."
"Where did you ever get such cards?" asked Alice.
"We made them ourselves," he replied. "We made them specially
for this occasion."
Alice thought it quite touching that they went to so much trouble
for the sake of one occasion.
"Besides, they're very pretty cards, and they were fun to make,"
he added.
"Now," he continued, "one or both of us will come out of the
house, and he (we) will make statements. Then you are to figure out
who is who."
"Just a minute," said Alice, "you have not told me the significance
of the colors orange and purple. Does one of them signify lying and
the other truth-telling? And if so, which color means which?"
"Ah, that's the most interesting part of the game!" said
Tweedledum. "You see, when I carry an orange card, it means
that I am telling the truth, and when I carry a purple card, it means
I am lying!"
"Contrariwise," said Tweedledee, "when I carry an orange card, it
means I am lying, and when I carry a purple card, it means I am
telling the truth!"
"Oh, that sounds very complicated!" remarked Alice.
"Not really," said Tweedledum, "not when you get used to it.
Shall we try?"
"Ye-es," said Alice, a bit doubtfully.
ROUND ONE Both brothers went into the house. Shortly
after, just one emerged and said, "My card is purple."
Alice had less trouble solving this than she had anticipated. Who
was the speaker?
79
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
ROUND TWO On the next round, both brothers came out
and made the following statements:
FIRST ONE: I am Tweedledum.
SECOND ONE: I am Tweedledum.
FIRST ONE: My brother's card is orange.
Which one was Tweedledum?
ROUND THREE On this round, the brothers made the
following statements:
FIRST ONE: I am Tweedledee.
SECOND ONE: I am Tweedledum.
FIRST ONE: Our cards are of the same color.
Who is who?
ROUND FOUR Alice found this round particularly interest-
ing.
FIRST ONE: Our cards are both purple.
SECOND ONE: That is not true!
Who is who?
80
Tweedledum or Tweedledee?
ROUND FIVE This time the brothers made the following
statements:
FIRST ONE: At least one of our cards is purple.
SECOND ONE: That is true.
FIRST ONE: I am Tweedledum.
Who is who?
ROUND SIX "Now for this round," said one of the brothers,
"the rules are the same, but the question you are to answer is
different: Instead of telling us which one is Tweedledee and which
one is Tweedledum, you are to figure out which one is lying and
which one is telling the truth."
Both brothers went into the house, and when they came out, they
made the following statements:
FIRST ONE: Our cards are of the same color.
SECOND ONE: Our cards are not of the same color.
Which one was telling the truth?
Game III: Two Extra-Specials
Both brothers congratulated Alice warmly for having won every
round.
"Before you leave," Tweedledee said with a grin, "we have two
extra-specials for you! We will play two extra games, one round
each, only the games will now be in sign language. We won't use
colored cards this time. What we'll do is this: We will both go into
the house, and one of us will come out first. The second one will
come out soon after, carrying a large sign with a question written on
it which both the first brother and you will be able to read clearly.
Then the first brother will answer the question in sign language: He
81
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
will draw either a square or a circle in the air. One of those two
figures means yes and the other means no, but you will not be told
which figure means what. However, the figure which does mean yes
is already drawn on the back of the sign, but you will not be allowed
to see it until after you have guessed which of us is Tweedledee and
which is Tweedledum. The first brother (the one who answers the
question) will, of course, have already seen the back of the sign, so
he will know which of the square and circle means yes and which
means no. However, he might lie when he gives his answer in sign
language."
"I'm not sure I understand that," said Alice.
"Well, if, for example, the circle means yes, and the correct
answer to the question is yes, then if he tells the truth, he will draw a
circle in the air; if he lies, he will draw a square in the air."
"Oh, I understand!" said Alice.
"Good! Then we'll play the first game. One last thing: My brother
and I have already agreed that if Tweedledee answers the question,
he will lie, and if Tweedledum answers, he will tell the truth.
WHO IS WHO? The brothers then went into the house. Almost
immediately, one of them came out and stood in silence. Shortly
82
WHAT QUESTION SHOULD ALICE ASK? "Congratulations, you
did it again!" both brothers cried.
"Now comes the best game of all, and if you win it, you also win a
prize!" said Tweedledee.
"This time," he continued, "we have not agreed which of us lies
and which tells the truth. What we do is this: we go into the house,
and each one comes out, each with either a red or a black card in his
pocket. Again, red signifies truth-telling and black signifies lying.
Now, just one of us has a prize in his other pocket. If you can guess
which one of us has the prize, you get it. It now is not important
which of us is Tweedledee and which is Tweedledum; your job is to
find out which one has the prize. Now, when we come out of the
house, you point to one of us and ask him a question—a question
answerable by yes or no. But instead of answering yes or no, he will
again answer in sign language: He will draw either a square or a
circle in the air. Now, the important point is this: if he is carrying
the prize, then by a square he means yes and by a circle he means
no. On the other hand, if he is not the one who is carrying the prize,
then by a square he means no and by a circle he means yes. On top
of that, he might tell the truth or he might lie—this is determined
by whether he is carrying a red card or a black card."
"But what question am I supposed to ask him?" inquired Alice.
"Ah, that is for you to figure out!" he triumphantly replied.
"That's the hardest part of the game, and if you can figure out the
right question, you certainly deserve a prize."
83
IS THE FIGURE ON
THE BACK OF THIS
SIGN A SQUARE?
Tweedledum or Tweedledee?
after, the other one came out bearing a sign, on the front of which
was written:
The other brother answered by drawing a circle in the air.
Which one was Tweedledum?
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
"Well," said Alice, "I'm afraid I can't do this without pencil and
paper, and I forgot to bring my memorandum book in this journey
into the Looking-Glass."
Tweedledee quickly went into the house and returned with a
pencil and a pad of paper.
"We'll be in the house while you are figuring out your question,
and when you are ready, call us and we will come out. Take as much
time as you like."
The brothers then went into the house, and Alice worked quite
hard on the puzzle. After a while, she shouted, "I'm ready." The
brothers then came out, Alice asked one of them a question, and he
replied by drawing either a square or a circle in the air. Alice
pointed to one of the two brothers and said, "You're the one who is
carrying the prize," and Alice was right.
How, in one question, could Alice find out which one has the
prize?
"Congratulations again!" said both brothers. "You have certainly
earned your prize!"
Alice was then given her prize, all nicely wrapped and tied
together. The more she tried unwrapping it, the tighter it got!
"Have you forgotten that you're in the Looking-Glass?" asked one
of the brothers.
"Oh, of course!" remembered Alice, who then tried wrapping it
and making the string tighter. This worked like magic; the parcel
almost immediately unwrapped itself.
The prize consisted of a pencil and a beautiful brand-new
memorandum book
