THE FIRST TALE "How about making us some nice tarts?" the
King of Hearts asked the Queen of Hearts one cool summer day.
"What's the sense of making tarts without jam?" said the Queen
furiously. "The jam is the best part!"
"Then use jam," said the King.
"I can't!" shouted the Queen. "My jam has been stolen!"
"Really!" said the King. "This is quite serious! Who stole it?"
"How do you expect me to know who stole it? If I knew, I would
have had it back long ago and the miscreant's head in the bargain!"
Well, the King had his soldiers scout around for the missing jam,
and it was found in the house of the March Hare, the Mad Hatter,
and the Dormouse. All three were promptly arrested and tried.
"Now, now!" exclaimed the King at the trial. "I want to get to the
bottom of this! I don't like people coming into my kitchen and
stealing my jam!"
"Why not?" asked one of the guinea pigs.
"Suppress that guinea pig!" shouted the Queen. The guinea pig
7
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
was promptly suppressed. (Those who have read Alice's Adventures
in Wonderland will recall the meaning of the word suppress: The
officers of the court put the guinea pig into a canvas bag, which tied
up at the mouth with strings, and sat upon it.)
"Now then," said the King, after the commotion of suppressing
the guinea pig had died down, "I want to get to the bottom of this!"
"You've already said that," remarked a second guinea pig. (This
guinea pig was also promptly suppressed.)
"Did you by any chance steal the jam?" the King asked the March
Hare.
"I never stole the jam!" pleaded the March Hare. (At this point all
the remaining guinea pigs cheered, and were all promptly sup-
pressed.)
"What about you?" the King roared to the Hatter, who was
trembling like a leaf. "Are you by any chance the culprit?"
The Hatter was unable to utter a word; he just stood there
gasping and sipping his tea.
"If he has nothing to say, that only proves his guilt," said the
Queen, "so off with his head immediately!"
"No, no!" pleaded the Hatter. "One of us st ole it, but it
wasn't me!"
"Make a note of that!" said the King to the jury. "This evidence
might turn out to be quite important!"
"And what about you?" continued the King to the Dormouse.
"What do you have to say about all this? Did the March Hare and
the Hatter both tell the truth?"
"At least one of them did," replied the Dormouse, who then fell
asleep for the rest of the trial.
As subsequent investigation revealed, the March Hare and the
Dormouse were not both speaking the truth. Who stole the jam?
(Solution on page 140.)
THE SECOND TALE "Now we have the jam back," said the
King, "so you can make us some tarts."
"How can I make tarts without flour?" asked the Queen.
8
Who Stole the Tarts?
"You mean the flour was stolen?" cried the King.
"Yes!" said the Queen. "Find the miscreant, and take his head
off!"
"Now, now," said the King, "let's not be hasty!"
Still, the flour had to be found. Sure enough, it was found in the
home of the March Hare, the Mad Hatter, and the Dormouse, so
these three were promptly arrested and tried.
At the trial, the March Hare claimed that the Hatter stole it. The
Hatter and the Dormouse also made statements, but for some
reason the statements were not recorded, so I cannot tell you what
they were. Anyhow, as it turned out, only one of the three had
stolen the flour, and he was the only one of the three who told the
truth.
Who stole the flour?
THE THIRD TALE "Well, here is your flour," said the King
happily, "so now you can make the tarts."
"Make tarts without pepper?" asked the Queen.
9
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
"Pepper!" said the King incredulously. "You mean you use
pepper in your tarts?"
"Not much," replied the Queen.
"And I suppose it was stolen!"
"Of course!" said the Queen. "Find the pepper, and when you
have found out who stole it, then off with his—"
"Now, now!" said the King.
Well, the pepper had to be found, of course. Now, as you all
know, people who steal pepper never tell the truth.
"What!" said Alice (not the Alice in Wonderland, but the Alice of
this party). "I never heard that before!"
"You haven't?" I said in mock surprise.
"Of course not! What's more, I don't believe anybody else has
either! Have any of you heard that before?"
The children all shook their heads negatively.
"Well," I said, "for purposes of this story, let's assume that people
who steal pepper never tell the truth."
"All right," said Alice, a bit hesitantly.
So, to continue the story, the most obvious suspect was the
Duchess's cook. At the trial she made but one statement: "I know
who stole the pepper!"
Assuming that people who steal pepper always lie, is the cook
guilty or innocent?
SO, WHO STOLE THE PEPPER? Well, the King's next suspects
were the March Hare, the Mad Hatter, and the Dormouse. Soldiers
were sent to their house, but no pepper was found. Still, they might
be hiding it somewhere, so they were arrested on general principles.
At the trial the March Hare claimed that the Hatter was innocent
and the Hatter claimed that the Dormouse was innocent. The
Dormouse mumbled some statement in his sleep, but it was not
recorded.
As it turned out, no innocent one made a false statement and (we
recall) people who steal pepper never make true statements. Also,
the pepper was stolen by only one creature. Which, if any of the
three, is guilty?
10
Who Stole the Tarts?
THEN WHO DID STEAL THE PEPPER? "My, my, this is really a
difficult case!" said the King.
The next suspects, curiously enough, were the Gryphon, the
Mock Turtle, and the Lobster. At the trial, the Gryphon said that
the Mock Turtle was innocent and the Mock Turtle said that the
Lobster was guilty.
Again, no innocent one lied and no guilty one told the truth.
Who stole the pepper?
A METAPUZZLE Alice (my friend) interrupted my story at
this point and said:
"You know, Raymond, your choice of characters for the last
puzzle was not wholly satisfactory."
I thought for a few moments, and suddenly realized what a
remarkably clever girl Alice is!
Those of you who have read Alice in Wonderland, can you see why?
THE FOURTH TALE "That certainly cost me a lot of work
finding the pepper," said the King angrily, "and I doubt that the
11
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
tarts will be all that much the better for it! Pepper indeed!"
continued the King. "Why don't you use blotting paper while you're
at it?" he added sarcastically.
"I do," replied the Queen, "but not much."
"Very funny!" said the King. "Anyway, now you have your
pepper back, so will you please make me the tarts?"
"Without sugar?" said the Queen.
"What's the matter, isn't the jam sweet enough?" asked the King
impatiently.
"I need sugar for the dough, and my sugar has been stolen!"
"Oh, not again!" said the King wearily. "These tarts will never get
made!"
Well, recovering the sugar turned out to be a relatively simple
affair. The sugar was found in the house of the Duchess, and as
events proved, it was stolen by either the Duchess or the Cook, but
not both. They made the following statements at the trial:
DUCHESS: The cook did not steal the sugar.
COOK: The Duchess stole the sugar.
The one who stole the sugar was lying. (It is not given whether
the other one lied or told the truth.)
Which one stole the sugar? Also, was the other one lying or telling
the truth?
THE FIFTH TALE "Well," said the King, "here is your sugar,
so you can make me the tarts."
"Without salt?" asked the Queen.
So! The salt had also been stolen! Well, this time it was found that
the culprit was either the Caterpillar, Bill the Lizard, or the
Cheshire Cat. (One of them had come into the kitchen and eaten up
all the salt; the container wasn't missing.) The three were tried and
made the following statements in court:
CATERPILLAR: Bill the Lizard ate the salt.
BILL THE LIZARD: That is true! CHESHIRE
CAT: I never ate the salt!
12
Who Stole the Tarts?
As it happened, at least one of them lied and at least one told the
truth.
Who stole the salt?
THE SIXTH TALE "Here is some more salt, so now you can
make the tarts," said the King.
"Can't," said the Queen. "Somebody stole my baking pan."
"Baking pan!" shouted the King. "Well, of course we'll have to get
that back!"
This time the search was narrowed down to the Frog-Footman,
the Fish-Footman, and the Knave of Hearts. They made the
following statements at the trial:
13
ALICE IN PUZZLE-LAND
FROG-FOOTMAN: It was stolen by the Fish-Footman.
FISH-FOOTMAN: Your Majesty, I never stole it! KNAVE
OF HEARTS: I stole it!
"A fine help you are!" shouted the King to the Knave. "You
usually lie through your teeth!"
Well, as it happened, at most one of them lied.
Who stole the baking pan?
THE SEVENTH TALE "Here is the baking pan," said the King,
"so now you can make me the tarts."
"Without a recipe?" inquired the Queen.
"Use your usual recipe," cried the King impatiently, "last time
your tarts were delicious!"
"Can't," said the Queen. "The recipe is in my cookbook, and the
cookbook has just been stolen!"
Well, the most likely suspect was the Duchess's Cook, and the
14
